Thank you!
(cheering and applause continue)
Do you ever get used to this?
It's a good feeling
to get used to.
-Thank you very much.
-(cheering and applause)
It feels like...
It literally feels like
you are the political Beatles.
That's what you are. You're
all of them, rolled into one.
-MAN: I love you, Bernie!
-Is-is it strange--
is it strange
to be in a position where,
in 2016, you were
the insurgent candidate--
you know, you were-- you were
leading a political revolution--
but now you're entering the race
as a frontrunner?
Um, like, d-does that
feel different for you?
Are you gonna do things
differently this time around?
It does feel differently.
And-and what's happened is that,
four years ago,
Trevor, the ideas
that we talked about,
the idea that health care is a
human right, not a privilege...
-Right.
-(cheering and applause) -Yeah.
Four years ago, that was
perceived as a radical idea.
Not anymore!
The idea that if you work
40 hours a week in this country,
you should make
at least 15 bucks an hour
and not live in poverty,
-not a radical idea anymore!
-(cheering and applause) -Right.
The idea that,
in a competitive global economy,
our young people need
the best education possible--
we should make public colleges
and universities tuition-free
and reduce student debt
substantially...
(cheering and applause)
Again, four years ago,
you will recall,
"Oh, Bernie's crazy.
I mean, there's just-- Nobody in
America supports those ideas."
-Yes. -Well,
four years have come and gone.
Those ideas are now supported
by a majority
of the American people.
(cheering and applause)
So...
So, then-- so, then you're done.
Why run?
(laughs)
One little problem.
We have to take on an incredibly
powerful establishment
that, to a large degree,
controls the economic and
political life of this country.
-Right.
-And when we talk--
The, you know--
the mantra of our campaign
is "Not me. Us."
And the reason for that is,
to take on Wall Street,
to take on the greed
of the pharmaceutical industry
and the insurance companies,
and if you want to save
the planet,
you're gonna have to take on
the fossil fuel industry,
and that means
millions of people
are gonna have to stand up
and fight back
in a way
that we have never done before.
And that's what this campaign
is about.
You know,
the media has picked up
on we raised a lot of money,
and that's great.
What was more important to me,
Trevor,
is we have over a million people
who are prepared
to volunteer on this campaign,
which is unprecedented.
-It's interesting that you,
uh... -(cheering and applause)
It's interesting
that you bring that up,
because you-you have raised
a lot of money--
I believe, $18 million
in under six weeks.
You-You're breaking records,
raising money
from individuals who say,
"Hey, we want to help you out,
Bernie."
But you hate the banks.
So where do you keep the money,
-under a mattress?
Where do you... -(laughs)
-Well...
-(laughing)
Still there. All right.
Let's-let's talk about--
let's talk
about this Democratic field.
This is an interesting time
where this field is more diverse
than ever before.
But some people have said,
"All right,
"you have a diverse field, but
it feels like the frontrunners
are still old white men."
You still have yourself,
you have Joe Biden,
who's not even in the race.
-You're not talking
about me, are you? -No, no, no.
-(laughter) -Oh.
-No, of course... of course not.
I mean, the white men,
the old white men.
Those older guys. Yes.
Um, but-but... but how do you
respond to that criticism
that people sometimes say like,
"Oh, well, isn't this a time
for you guys to step aside?"
Look, I think
the American people have
to make that decision.
-Right.
-No-Nobody else makes it.
And what I believe what politics
is about is taking a hard look
at the ideas and the history
and the experience
that candidates have.
And let me be very clear.
I know, you know, certainly all
of the senators who are running
for president,
and without exception,
that are good, smart,
dedicated people.
-Many of them are my friends.
-Right.
So you're not gonna hear me
disparaging other candidates.
Uh, but I think
it is appropriate
for people to say, "Okay, uh,
"who has been talking
about this issue when?
"Who had the courage
to go forward,
-uh, and at what time?"
-Right.
So it's important not to look
at just personalities.
I think in American politics
in general,
-we do too much of that.
-Yes.
What we need to do is to say,
"Okay, we have massive levels
of income and wealth inequality.
"As a nation, are we happy that
three people own more wealth
"than the bottom half
of America?
"Are we happy that billionaires
are able to buy elections?
"How do we change that?
How do we create a nation
-in which you have universal
childcare?" -Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Where you don't have
half of our people
living paycheck to paycheck.
So I think what we need to do is
focus on a progressive agenda.
And I'm proud of the fact
that I've been a leader
in fighting for that agenda
for a long time.
It's interesting. Basically,
what you're saying is...
(applause and cheering)
You're basically saying,
people have jumped on,
-but you're the O.G.
of this idea. -(laughter)
That's-that's essentially
what you're saying.
And-and interestingly enough,
as an O.G.,
you've-you've managed to connect
with groups
that many people haven't been
able to connect with.
I mean, you're-you're able
to connect with young voters.
You know, historically,
18 to 29-year-olds don't vote.
-Right. That's right.
-You know?
But they've... they've-they've
come out for you.
We've seen this repeatedly.
It's also been interesting
to see
that you are actually leading
with minority voters, as well.
The people that have been polled
right now.
What do you think is driving
those... those-those voters?
Why do you think
you're connecting so well
with young people
who don't think
voting is usually worth it?
Uh, I think that this generation
is, in my view,
the most progressive generation
probably in the history
of the United States of America.
-This is a generation
of young people... -Right.
(applause and cheering)
...who are not going
to tolerate racism
or sexism or homophobia
or xenophobia
or religious bigotry,
all of which, sadly,
the president of
the United States is giving us.
And I think it is also
a generation, Trevor,
and we should make
this point out--
they're not doing well
financially, all right?
Everything being equal,
this is a generation that,
unless we turn it around,
will have a lower standard
of living than their parents.
They are leaving...
I just met with some young
people yesterday in my office.
Young people who are going
into teaching
$180,000 in debt
for college loans.
That's not uncommon.
People, young people
can't afford apartments.
They're living
with their parents.
So they understand
that we need to have an economy
-and a government that works
for everybody... -Right.
not just the one percent.
And I think our message
resonates with them, as well.
-(applause, whooping)
-You really have...
you really have connected
with people
that-that-that
you wouldn't expect.
I mean, young people,
uh, people of color--
you've connected
with so many groups.
And now what's really
interesting to me is,
it recently came out
that you have decided to do
-a Fox News town hall...
-Yeah.
even though, you know,
the DNC made a decision
to not go with Fox News
for any of the, uh, the debates.
-Yes. -You're breaking
with that line of thinking.
Some would say, "But, Bernie,
why would you go to Fox News?
It's not a legitimate
news organization."
-So what are you doing there?
-Well... -(laughter)
Trust me, I know Fox News.
-(laughter)
-I know who they are,
and I know the role
that they are playing.
-Right.
-Uh, on the other hand,
the, uh...
during the last campaign,
I did a town meeting with a
fellow named, uh, Bret Baier...
-Yes.
-who did it very fairly.
And, uh, he did it
straightforward.
Believe me, we went over
the ground rules before,
and they kept their word.
So to me it is important
to distinguish Fox News
from the many millions of people
who watch Fox News.
-Right.
-And I think it is important
to talk to those people
and say: You know what?
I know that many of you voted
for Donald Trump,
but he lied to you.
He told you, for example,
he was gonna provide health care
to all people.
Now he wants
to throw 30 million people
off the health care
that they had.
He told you that he
was gonna give tax reform
that would not benefit
the wealthy.
83% of the benefits go
to the top one percent.
So I think it is important
to talk to Trump's supporters
and explain to him
to what degree he has betrayed
the working class
of this country
and lied during his campaign
in terms of what he would do.
This has been
an interesting time
where, you know,
people have said:
Bernie's running again.
Uh, Bernie doesn't feel old,
but your age is still a number,
-despite what Aaliyah says,
and... -(laughter)
and some people are saying:
Hey, Bernie...
do you have any concerns
about your health?
Are you doing things
to keep yourself healthy
if you were to take
the office of the presidency?
Look, all I can say is,
thank God--
this is not wood,
but I'm knocking on it anyhow--
-my health is good.
-Right.
When I was a kid,
I was a long distance runner.
I had a lot of endurance,
and I still do.
-(woman whoops)
-So I am feeling...
(laughter, cheering, applause)
Not like that. Hey. Hey.
Sorry. I'm sorry about them.
-I'm so sorry.
-(laughter)
You know, and-and I recall
some of these reporters
who say,
"Well, you're kind of old,"
and they were following me
on the campaign trail,
and they say,
"Slow down, slow down.
-Right.
-You're moving too fast."
It really is something that-that
you have used to your credit.
And, um, let's talk
about some of the policies.
-Good. -You know,
Bernie Sanders is someone
who has been notorious
as the person
who can tell it like it is.
You know? That's one thing
I loved, you were like...
Howard Schultz, when they said:
Oh, he... he'll agree
to step out of the race
if people like Bernie go away,
if they put up
a moderate candidate.
And you were like,
"Oh-ho, thank you very much.
Oh, how nice of him."
But you've always been
a person who seems like
a complete straight talker,
so let's get into some
of the issues here.
-Let's talk about health care,
all right? -Good.
This past week, House Democrats
introduced a bill
to strengthen Obamacare, right?
It was supported by everyone
from Pelosi through to AOC,
but you said, "No. I don't want
to support this."
You said "I want to come in
and I want to fight
for Medicare for everyone."
Right?
And some people might say,
"Okay, but Bernie,
"if everyone is going one way
and you're going your own way,
"doesn't that go against
what the job
of the president's gonna be?
Don't you have to sell ideas?"
Trevor, here is the reality.
The reality is that bill
will never pass the Senate.
I don't even think it'll be
taken up by the Senate.
So where we are right now
is a fight for
how we do two things.
Number one, as a nation,
should we guarantee health care
to all people as a human right?
-Right.
-I think, "yes."
If you do that, how do you do it
in a cost-effective way?
And I think the answer
is overwhelming
that the only way to do that
is through
a Medicare-for all,
single-payer program.
Now, I supported Obamacare.
In fact, we got some really
important provisions in it.
But the discussion
that you're raising
is a little bit academic,
'cause that bill is not gonna
come to the Senate.
What we have to do now is rally
the American people
and ask the questions why,
at a time when we have
30 million uninsured,
we are spending twice as much
per capita on health care
as do the people
of any other country?
Why do we pay by far
the highest prices in the world
for prescription drugs?
So would you try and bring
the cost of Medicare--
-medical aid down? -Absolutely.
We got legislation...
Would you bring health care,
prescription drugs...?
Absolutely. Look,
we have legislation in
that will lower the cost
of prescription drugs
in this country by 50%.
Is that a radical idea? No.
It's not a radical idea
because that's what
the rest of world is paying.
We are getting ripped off
by the greed
of the pharmaceutical industry.
In terms of health insurance,
it now costs
about $11,000 per person
for health care in this country;
family of four, 28,000 bucks.
-That is unsustainable.
-Right.
Twice as much
as the Canadians do.
They guarantee health care
to all people.
Why is that?
Because the function
of the current
health care system--
you're not gonna hear
too many people say this--
is not to provide health care
to all people,
it is to make huge profits
for the insurance companies
and the drug companies.
It is to provide people
like the guy
who's head of
United Health Insurance
$83 million in compensation
in one year.
It is to allow the five major
drug companies
to make $50 billion
in profit last year.
Somebody has got
to take these guys on.
They're criminals,
people are hurting.
We need to move toward
Medicare-for-all.
(cheers and applause)
One thing you...
you really do bring up,
and, I mean, health care
just touched on it,
-is income inequality.
-Yes.
Um, you have been proud to say,
"Yes, I believe that we need
"to adjust how people earn money
in this country,
-and how people are taxed."
-Yes.
Trump has now used this
as a slur against you,
calling you a socialist,
you know.
And saying that it means
that we're gonna all
have to drive battery cars
and-and share one road.
-But what does it mean to you?
-Good-- Good question.
Thank you for asking it.
It means that economic rights
are human rights, okay?
I believe, from the bottom
of my heart,
that health care
is a human right.
I believe that in
the richest country
in the history of the world,
we should not have a tax system
which allows Amazon,
owned by the wealthiest guy
in the world,
to pay zero in federal taxes
last year,
after making $11 billion
in profits.
That is insane.
To be a democratic socialist
means that we believe--
I believe-- that human rights
include a decent job,
affordable housing,
health care, education
and, by the way,
a clean environment.
It means
that we cannot allow our kids
to grow up in an environment
-which is increasingly unhealthy
and uninhabitable. -Right.
We have got to take on
the fossil fuel industry,
move to energy efficiency
and sustainable energy.
-That's what it means to me.
-I know that you are...
(cheering and applause)
I know that you are
proposing legislation
arguing that companies
shouldn't be able
to participate in stock buybacks
if they don't provide
their workers
-with a minimum wage
of a certain amount... -Exactly.
-...and health care and
seven days off in a year. -Yes.
-Right.
-But let me ask you this.
Doesn't... Some people
may argue that, like,
"Bernie, that's the government
getting involved
at the boardroom level."
Shouldn't you just go in
and say,
"Hey, let's reverse
the SEC ruling
on how easy it is
for stock buybacks to occur"?
Well, we-we're in favor
of doing that, as well.
But I think what we have
right now, Trevor,
is an economic system
where the people on top
in corporate America--
to a large degree,
not-not totally--
are just incredibly greedy
and very contemptuous
of working people.
For example, the average CEO
of a major corporation
now makes 300 times more
than his or her employees.
-Mm-hmm.
-That's really not acceptable.
People are doing buybacks,
stock buybacks,
uh, while at the same time,
they're not paying their workers
a living wage.
So I think it is
the responsibility
of the federal government
to be aggressive
and to make certain
that the working people
of this country,
uh, get a fair shake.
Give you another example.
Uh, if a company today
is making money
but they want to shut down
and move
to low-wage countries abroad,
well, you know,
I got a problem with that
if they then get online
to get a federal contract.
-They want a military contract.
-Right.
So we have a right
to say to them,
"You want a military contract?
"You want some federal money?
You know what,
treat your workers
with respect."
What's happened
in the last 40 years,
there's been a massive transfer
of wealth
from working families
to the top one percent.
We've got to reverse that trend.
-(cheering and applause)
-Speaking of a fair shake...
speaking of a fair shake,
before we're done,
it's been interesting
that now the Democrats
have used their power
to say to the IRS,
-"We want to see Donald Trump's
tax returns." -Yeah.
Um, people on the right
have responded and said,
"But where's Bernie's
tax returns?
"Bernie only released 2014.
We still don't have
Bernie's tax returns."
And I was like, "Well,
if Bernie hasn't released them,
"and Trump hasn't released them,
there's probably secrets
on both sides."
-(laughs) -My theory is
Trump doesn't want us to know
that he's not a billionaire,
and you don't want us to know
that you are.
(laughter)
-So, are we gonna see
your tax returns? -You sure are.
Look, um, April 15 is coming.
That will be the tenth year,
and we will make them all public
very shortly.
But what's all? What's all?
Just so people know.
-Ten years.
-Ten years of tax returns.
And by the way,
I'm delighted to do that.
Proud to do that.
Hey, Mr. Trump,
you do the same thing.
(cheering and applause)
Senator Bernie Sanders,
everybody.